First of all, I was just interested in how you got started in science fiction.
What drew you to the field and when you started reading it and personal things
like that. Right. Well, I actually began a serious interest in science fiction
after my first degree in English at the University of Singapore, as it was then
called. I have, of course, been reading science fiction for a much longer
period. As you yourself know, I mean, most of us get to science fiction when we
are about 12 or 13. And through the comics and then we graduate to the books.
And by the time we are 18, we usually tuck it away, unfortunately, for a while.
That's what happened with me. And when I had my first degree and I was going on
to do my master's, I had thought of doing research into Indian writing and
English. But my professor, who was quite keen on getting new work done, advised
me to study the impact of technology on the literary imagination. And that's
exactly what I did. And that's when I developed a very serious interest, began
meeting authors, attending meetings, writing to people. Okay. And your present
involvement in the field, besides teaching, besides teaching, and of course,
you've written a book or two and so forth. You said you've traveled around and
so forth. Could you describe briefly what that entails? Right. Yes. Certainly,
as an academic, as I think is the best way of describing myself at the present
moment, I get lots of opportunities to travel all over the world at conferences
and meetings. And as often as I can, within the broad interpretation of any one
conference that might be taking place, I try to offer papers on science fiction.
Because I do feel it's a very viable topic for discussion. And what I think
needs to be done is to expose as many people as it's possible to science
fiction, so that they can understand and get to know what science fiction is all
about. And that's what I do. Apart from teaching science fiction at the National
University of Singapore now, I also edit critical essays on science fiction from
all over the world. And we've just brought out a book called The Stellar Gage,
which has in-depth academic analyses of about 12 authors, including some very
famous ones. And our contributors are also famous, like Christopher Priest,
Brian Aldiss, John Sladek, George Turner and the others. I also have just edited
the first ever collection of science fiction short stories from Singapore. These
were the best stories submitted for a first ever national-wide science fiction
short story competition. So that's what I do briefly. I'm also at the moment, if
I may say, just adding something personally, working on a science fiction novel
that would incorporate all my travels all over the world, my readings up to now,
some speculations that I have about the future, discussions and meetings with
various science fiction authors like Arthur Clarke, Brian Aldiss, Jack Williamson
and others. It will have Singapore as its direct setting, but the whole world as
a background. I look forward to that. Sure need encouragement. Your book, Wonder
and Awe, The World of Science Fiction, briefly, what was the theme or the
purpose or the central idea of that publication? Right. That is actually a
prelude to a much bigger book that I'm working on called Science Fiction and the
Literary Imagination. In Wonder and Awe, what I basically try to do is to expose
a lot of the fallacies, I think, that are associated with science fiction and
with science fiction criticism, particularly on the part of mainstream literary
critics. And I argue, I think, quite vehemently, Cain's for the validity and
legitimization of science fiction as literature today. That's a basic theme of
that. It's a very small book. You feel then that the distinction between science
fiction and mainstream is an artificial or a useless one, that they should be
one, considered one, the same thing? I think, ultimately, the distinctions ought
to disappear, frankly, because the more we try to erect these boundaries, the
more we get into troubled waters, because, as we all know, categories are, by
their very nature, exclusive. And when they become too exclusive, as I think the
case has been with science fiction for a long time, what develops is a hiatus,
and that could lead to a breakdown in communication rather than an integration.
And I think one of the reasons why, perhaps, science fiction has not quite
enjoyed the kind of status that it ought to as a valid and viable form of
literature in our time is the fact that too often, and by too many people, it
has been very zealously and jealously guarded as something exclusive, something
that one entered with a great deal of trepidation, things like that. So, yes, I
think, ultimately, there has to be an elimination of the categories. As Brian
Aldi says, science fiction is literature.
Could you give some examples of the influences that have kept them separate? You
mean things like fans, the publishing industry, or what kind of... Yes, I think
fans, to a large extent, explain the exclusiveness, as we are witnessing in this
convention here in Denver itself. One of the things that I notice most readily
is the fact that a lot of the fans are not really, I think, very keen on a
serious discussion of science fiction. They're here to have a good time, and
that's a very good thing in itself. I mean, I think people ought to have a good
time. But at the same time, they mustn't then go on and complain that, oh, you
know, we are regarded as freaks, as people on our own individual trips. Because
I think, in some ways, we SF enthusiasts invite that kind of charge or
accusation. I also feel that a lot of the science fiction writers are themselves
responsible for this. I've talked personally with a number of them, and I've
heard many of them speaking, and I've read what they have said in fanzines and
things. They do want to keep this kind of thing going, because the science
fiction writers feel that they are commercially viable only insofar as they have
got a large fan following. And if they have a large fan following, then they
feel that they can sell. Now, the same writers also lament the fact that serious
critics at the universities, in colleges and all, are not taking them seriously.
But I want to question that, because to a large extent, I think it's part of
their own making. And they don't put enough effort and serious struggle into the
work. And therefore, the outcome of it is quite mediocre, to say the least. It
seemed to me it would be a very rare author in today's world, though, who would
dedicate his life to writing significant works when he could make some money.
Yes, yes. Nevertheless, I do think that the world of science fiction, I think,
reveals an astounding number of very young people who have made it good
overnight. You know, people who are much below 40 have already got established
reputations in the world of SF. I'm not to be accused of being extra
conservative or something, but I do feel that it needs a lot of time and serious
effort if you want to establish yourself as an author for posterity. You have
your fans, and you have your books, and you have your novels, and your
publishers, and your money. But I think all this would disappear the moment you
die, or the moment what you write about becomes outdated. One of the reasons why
SF writers are so eager to get book after book coming out is that the book after
book goes out of date so fast. And this is, I think, what they really mean when
people talk about the pulp world of SF. You've spoken of the need for a strong
literary voice, a responsible, critical influence to make science fiction
respectable and so forth. Could you explain that briefly? Yes, if I could draw
an analogy. I think those of us who have been engaged in the study of English
literature know how difficult it has been for any other literatures written in
English to make any kind of headway, given the big, rich heritage of English
literature itself coming down from Chaucer, downwards. In my university in
Singapore, for a long time, even American literature was taboo, because the
professor there didn't believe that much American literature, and I mean the
classics, really offered anything significant to those who were interested in
doing literature as a subject. Now, that's a kind of resistance that I think
good critics, and with the reference to American literature, I think the good
critics that really put American literature on the world map and made all of us
aware of the potential of American literature were people like Edmund Wilson,
people like Lionel Trilling. I think what they did for American literature. I
think what they did for American literature is what is necessary at the current
time for science fiction. And as I cast my eyes around the world, I don't think
there are people with that kind of caliber who are engaged in, or seriously
engaged, in science fiction criticism. Because I do think you need a good,
viable, critical tradition to give strength and body to the, or at least do the
selecting, which is very essential to the body of science fiction itself. And of
course, that leads to another question. I've heard your ideas on this before.
What is it that prevents responsible critics from approaching science fiction?
Oh, I think primarily, as I'm going to repeat myself, but primarily there are
two reasons. One is this whole thing about science fiction being an exclusive
thing. And as I said at the talk today, science fiction fandom and authors and
publishers and all tend to regard themselves as a little colony. And much as
they don't try to colonize others, they also resent any kind of intrusion from
the outside world. Now that, of course, puts a serious literary critic on his
guard and on his defensive, you know, creates a kind of defensive posture.
Because the moment he wants to make an incursion into the world of science
fiction, he's dismissed as being a yet another academic who's trying to bullshit
his way through. And that's one opposition that's from within SF. And I think
the second is from within themselves. I mean, most literary critics that I know
of, and this is again why I stress the fact that there aren't people of the
caliber of people like Lionel Trilling. Most literary critics I know of are
pretty narrow-minded and very set in their views. And it's very difficult to
convince them that there is very viable stuff in SF. And as a result of which
they are ignorant, they do not know what's happening in the real world of
science fiction. And because of this great sort of idea, great image that is
created of SF as being something for young people, something that is only
exciting to the scientists or those who are scientifically inclined, a lot of
literary critics just keep themselves away, I think, lock themselves out from
this very exciting world of SF. You think then that science fiction, significant
literary works can be written in the science fiction mode? Oh, certainly. Most
certainly. I mean, after all, what is literature but an exquisite fusion of
thoughts with emotion? What we have mostly in science fiction is a thought
without, I think, the accompanying emotion. But this also means that a lot of
the language that is faulty in science fiction, I think that's the main reason
why literary critics do not want to talk too much about science fiction or take
it too seriously. The main fault, as I see it, is that a lot of the language in
science fiction novels or science fiction short stories does not measure up to
any kind of enrichment. It doesn't enrich the imagination at all. There are lots
of ideas and ideas upon ideas, but in order to be considered literature, you
need something beyond that. And this is where science fiction has a very viable
role to play. If we can get an author who is able to use language with the
amount of versatility and talent and skill that a lot of the so-called
mainstream writers can do, then I think there's a lot of scope because then you
really would have the backup of your ideas as well as your imaginative
expression of this. What I'm saying in a roundabout way is that too much of
science fiction tends to be superficial and too simplistic. There's not enough
of metaphor. There isn't enough metaphorical language. I mean, a symbol is not a
symbol in a science fiction book. It is exactly what it's meant to be.
Therefore, science fiction, if you may use it in linguistic jargon here, a lot
of science fiction is merely denotational and not connotational. It doesn't
connote anything. It just denotes. That's that. By that, do you mean, is that
what you meant before when you said that science fiction doesn't transcend? Yes.
Yes. I mean, you know, and this is why so much of science fiction becomes
obsolete. There's too much attention, too much ostentatious attention paid to
scientific detail, scientific accuracy, new technological breakthroughs and
things so that the imagination, I think, is sapped up by the facts rather than
fiction. So that what happens in science fiction is that science takes over the
fiction. And to be established as literature, I think it's the fiction that
needs to prevail. Okay. Now, you said a moment ago, and most anybody would agree
with this, I think that science fiction is based on ideas or plot and so forth,
and is therefore weak on character and things like that. Do you think that if a
serious mainstream writer or, say, a serious writer attempted to infuse
mainstream values into a literature of ideas, would that destroy science fiction
as we know it? Would that take away its charm, its vitality, and we would have
something new that wouldn't be science fiction? I think that those of us who
feel that that is the only distinction that differentiates, or the only
characteristic that differentiates science fiction from mainstream, I think for
those of us who believe in that, yes, we will be disappointed. But I think that
would be a very narrow view of science fiction itself, though. Put it this way.
Are we to assume that all the things that, say, somebody like Kurt Vonnegut has
written, or somebody like Ursula Le Guin has written, or somebody like Walter
Miller has written, are we to assume that these three authors, for example, are
no longer writing science fiction because they are trying to infuse their work
with the qualities of mainstream fiction? I think the immediate answer would be
no. No. And yet, from a different perspective, I feel that, yes, the superficial
attraction of science fiction for a lot of people would be gone. I mean, if
you're only interested in reading a book as to know what happens next, what
happens next, I mean, that's the only reason, then I think your appetite would
be very soon vetted. Do you think that the so-called new wave movement in
science fiction a few years back, do you think that did anything to bring
science fiction closer to mainstream? Because they were, as I read them, much
more interested in character and symbol and so forth. Was that a benefit? Did
you see it as something beneficial to the field? Yes and no. No. I think
whenever something gets caught on in a kind of bandwagon, the detractors or the
people who just jump onto the bandwagon in order to make a name for themselves,
these are, I think, the real detractors. Though they may not appear to be
detractors, I consider them detractors because they're just opportunistic. I
mean, they can do a lot of damage. Though I think that people like Michael
Moacock and Brian Aldiss have done some very good work in terms of trying to make
science fiction into literature and trying to create a very viable literature. I
might add at this point that something that I've spoken to you before about,
that as science and technology moves into the soft areas, into the areas of
behavioral sciences like biology or physiology or brain research and things like
that, I think that's when the good literature from science fiction would emerge
because then the SF writers would be forced to consider the interior landscape
of a human being and not merely the exterior. I think too much attention at the
moment is being paid on the external environment without giving enough focus to
the internal. And as science and technology moves, I mean, science and
technology has more or less made man the master of his environment, but now
technology is also trying to make man a master of himself. As technology and
science itself moves with all its machinery and apparatus into the human mind
and tries to probe into areas unknown before, likewise the science fiction
writers would also follow, and I think that's when a new spur might come.
Just to follow, this might probably be my last question in this area. Do you
feel there is a need for an escapist literature that is there purely for escape
and with no significance beyond that? Does it have any value or is there a need
for that? Yes, I think we all need escapes. And reading a good book is escape
enough. Now, put a question another way. If I were to read, say, The Tempest by
Shakespeare, or The Miller's Tale by Chaucer, which you are yourself an expert,
I mean, would that not be tantamount also to a kind of escape, given the 20th
century? I think it's not so much the need for escape that I'm questioning, but
the quality of that escape. I think some escapes are better than others, as some
escapades are more exciting than others. And that's what I'm really questioning.
I think there's fantasy and there's horror movies and horror things and whatnot.
But I think, ultimately, science fiction... I mean, in the 20th century, from
one point of view, everything that we do is escapist. Because, you know, how are
we to confront reality anyway? Too much reality does us no good, as Elliot
pointed out a long time ago. So I think there is a genuine need for the escape.
But if science fiction could provide a more qualitative escape for minds to
engage themselves, you know, and come back again and again to a point of
reference, then I think we would see science fiction as really growing and
developing into maturity. In your travels and your lectures and so forth, the
places you go to, could you comment on the differences or the similarities, I'm
not sure what there would be, between, say, the fandom, the environment
surrounding science fiction in other countries versus America. Is there a big
difference there? Not very much from what I'm seeing. Fans all over the world,
and this is the unique thing, I think, about science fiction. Fans all over the
world are absolute devotees of the field. I mean, there's no question about
that. Fans everywhere in Singapore, in Malaya, in India, in Australia, New
Zealand, England, America, they all show the same kind of fervour, vitality,
gusto in their approach to science fiction. What I have noticed is that in
America, among the academics, there seems to be now at least somewhat less of a
resistance to the teaching of science fiction in the university, to having
science fiction courses on their curriculum. In England, I think the
breakthrough is gradually being made. We've got some fine people in England
working seriously in the science fiction area. In Australia, I think, generally,
there's still a good deal of conservatism. New Zealand is almost absolutely
conservative. In Singapore itself, well, I do what I can for science fiction.
There's a whole unit on that at the university. So I don't think there's any
difference between fans all over the world, but the differences come at the
level of the serious reader of science fiction. I don't mean to imply that fans
are not serious readers, but I don't think they read science fiction the way in
which an academic would want to read it or the way in which a literary critic
would want to do it. Yeah. I have to confess a great deal of ignorance about
Oriental science fiction, period.
In fact, I would even have to ask, is there a body of Oriental science fiction,
and is it different than what American readers would know as science fiction?
Yeah, I think there's going to be some very good things coming out from China
when more and more of the stuff that Chinese are writing becomes available in
English. Since I myself don't read Chinese, I rely on the translations and what
my Chinese friends tell me. I think there we're going to see a kind of science
fiction that is free of the obvious influence either of British or American SF.
Now, at the moment, the one country in Asia that has a lot of science fiction is
Japan, and because of the close links between Japan and America, that also shows
in its literature, Japanese SF is not quite different from American SF. Though I
think the science fiction that's been written in Singapore, or the science
fiction in India, and this might be also a reflection of our links with Britain,
we reveal more of British influence. And in some ways, I don't want to... How
should I say it? I would immediately, I think, beg indulgence and forgiveness if
I step on many toes here. I do think that a lot of American science fiction
tends, unfortunately, to be a little more gimmicky than, say, the British
science fiction. I do feel that the British SF writers do take themselves a
little more seriously as art, as writers of literature, than the American SF
writers. And this is not to cast aspersion, because there are, of course,
exceptions. And some of the best science fiction, both criticism and fiction,
has been actually written in America. But I do think that, on the whole, America
tends to be a little more taken up with immediate returns. And immediate
returns, the more sensational you are, the more gimmicky you are, the more
immediately you make an impact. But as I say, the more quickly you receive your
recognition, the more quickly, I think, you also tend to lose it. That, what was
it, Singapore Science Fiction? Was that the title of the... Yes, of the
anthology, yes. Okay, now, would those writers in that anthology be all from
Singapore? I mean, was that put together with that in mind? Yes, it was confined only to
Singaporeans. Could you expose it at a contest that put the book together? Yes.
Could you explain that? Yes, Singapore Science Fiction is a collection of 14
short stories that I've edited. These were the best, the prize-winning short
stories in the national competition we had on short stories, science fiction
short story competition in 1918. And I had invited Brian Aldiss over to Singapore
to read some of the scripts and give us his comments. He thought it was very
good. In fact, he's got a forward to the anthology, in which he says, you know,
the fiction of Southeast Asia and Singapore, it's going to blaze Nova-like onto
the universe, you know, in that very exuberant terminology of his. They're
mainly written by young people, and that's exciting. Though I must say that the
first and second prize went to people who are already in their 40s, and I think
there are at least five stories in Singapore Science Fiction, which could
measure up to good Science Fiction short stories anywhere in the world today.
The other eight tend to be a little derivative and imitative. And there, all
kinds of influences are revealed, mainly British, but also very pronounced
American influence. But then that's again another problem with Science Fiction
all over the world. I mean, there's a lot of imitation and derivation, isn't
there?
I'm kind of curious to know who you would consider as being, in your terms, a
good Science Fiction writer. You mentioned Miller and Ursula Le Guin already.
Could you name some others, say contemporary writers, who you would respect?
Contemporary? Yeah. I think Elizabeth Lynn might make it if she continues to
persevere in the craft. I'm a little sorry as to what's happening to Ray
Bradbury, because I haven't seen anything from him for a while.
As I look around, I don't think I see much beyond that. I think the field is
still dominated by people like Hal Clement, Michael Moorcock and the others across
the Atlantic. But I don't see, frankly speaking, any young writer on the horizon
who could make a breakthrough. Or if there is, I'm ignorant, unfortunately.
Well, I'm going to ask this from my own knowledge. I'm not going to put this on
the air. Have you read any of Joe Haldeman? No. Okay. The forever war I was
going to ask about. It seemed to me that would almost meet your requirements of
mainstream science fiction. I'm thinking about that, yeah. Gosh, we don't, let's
see. Let me see if I've gotten any more here. I've gotten a lot of good material
so far.
I think Angela Carter, by the way, does something quite good. Among the women
writers. Angela Carter. I don't know her at all. Fireworks, you know, her
anthology called Fireworks. The distinctions may not always be very clear
because she is more in the realm of fantasy than science fiction. Oh, yes, of
course. There is a contemporary science fiction writer that I do want to put a
plug for. That's Philip K. Dick. I think Philip K. Dick is producing work which
not only challenges all the assumptions of science fiction as we know it
hitherto, but he's also writing work that would make the categories between
mainstream and science fiction disappear because I think he really is right into
the fusion of the two. And, of course, Aldiss in England, I think, he's doing
some very good work. And I would also mention Stanislav Lem, who was from
Europe, and somebody like Christopher Priest, though I wish Priest spent just a
little more time getting his thoughts more cogently organized. We're just about
out of tape. Let me ask a couple of questions. This is as it runs down. Okay,
now you mentioned, you said you're working, you are working on a novel. Yes. And
your book, Wonder and Awe, was simply a prelude to a longer work. Yes. What else
do you envision? I mean, what kinds of writing or work do you see yourself
doing? On a personal level? Oh, yes. On a personal level. Well, you know, quite
frankly, Daryl, I'm very eclectic in my taste. I've also published quite
extensively in Commonwealth literature, or what they call new literatures in
English. And I've looked, I've done a book on Patrick White, the Australian
Nobel Prize winning novelist. I'm increasingly, I'm working on a book on a
Malaysian writer, Yip Yang Hong. And I also dabble in poetry. So my second
volume of verse is coming out shortly. I'm doing a critical study of all South
Asian literatures in English. And as far as science fiction goes, I'm going, I'm
working on a big study of the work of Arthur C. Clarke. That would be a, what, a
critical? Study of his work? Yes, a critical, critical analysis of Clarke's
work. You admire his work? To a good extent, yes. Not the novels with which he's
usually associated. I think that Clarke has produced some very good work. What I
question sometimes is his faith in science and technology to, you know, cure the
ills of mankind. But I do think that in his earlier work, and in some of the
later ones like Rendezvous with Rama, I think he does try to attempt some kind
of stylistic elegance. You know, I mean, after all, Clarke is now very rich, and
he can write a novel, take his time, relax. And I think this is very important.
I wanted to say this earlier, but, you know, I think a lot of science fiction
writers, the reason why they don't seem to produce work that sustain is the fact
that they write from a very anxious angle. They're very anxious whether the fans
are going to receive it well. They're anxious whether they're going to get
published, how the editors are going to respond, and things like that. And I
think too much anxiety doesn't do good because the spontaneity is lost, the
natural flow of the language is lost. And when a man is uptight, I don't think
we are looking at him at his best. Let me just ask Pursuitists for a second here
this. You said that this book, Wonder and Awe, would be leading to a larger
work. Would that be an expansion of your ideas regarding criticism and the need
for it and the approach it? Yes, because Wonder and Awe, I've been very
interested in all the reviews that Wonder and Awe has got, and I've gained more
insight into my own critical thinking around the subject. When I was working on
Wonder and Awe, I corresponded with people like David Catrow and Northrop Frye,
who I think have offered something quite seminal in literary criticism of
science fiction, and Robert Conquest. I think these are the pioneers of genuine
literary criticism as far as science fiction goes. And what I want to do now is
put all these thoughts together and apply a lot of the critical things that I've
fathomed over the publication of Wonder and Awe and the reviews subsequently. I
want to put all these together and apply them to specific authors in science
fiction. And I think it might take about three or four years for it to come out,
but I'm very interested in that. It will also, by the way, be an expansion of my
own master's thesis, which was entitled Technology and the Modern Novel. And the
kind of questions that I'm interested in asking myself now, a good writer would
naturally take into account man's environment, and if man's environment is
changing, he has to reckon with that. Now, science fiction does that
exemplarily. How does, for example, the novels of A.C. Clarke, that incorporate
all the new adventures of space travel or cloning and things, how do they differ
in their literary impact from, say, the novels of D.H. Lawrence, who was also
saying that a mechanical civilization is screwing world up. That's the kind of
comparisons that I want to do and work into. That's great. Okay, I think...
Yeah, I better turn that off. Thanks a lot. Thank you very much for the
opportunity. That's fascinating.